From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Aubaro. This is the Daily.
[music]
The construction of a massive factory in
Arizona was supposed to embody the Trump
administration's ability to bring
[music] manufacturing back to the US.
Instead, as my colleague Peter Goodman
found out, it's provided [music]
companies around the world with
literally 18,000
reasons to think twice about building in
[music] America.
[music]
It's Monday, December 22nd.
Peter, good of you to come into the
studio.
>> Delighted.
>> I wonder just to start this conversation
if you can describe
this factory that you recently visited
to us.
>> Yeah, sure.
>> So, it's about 9:20 in the morning on
Friday and I'm just arriving. I mean,
there's this giant, mostly empty desert
valley in the extreme north of Phoenix,
as far as the eye could see. Really
emptiness.
>> I'm standing on a gravel road, uh,
looking at cactuses and various desert
scrub just flowing out to the horizons
that this is all going to get filled up
with housing and and offices to feed.
>> So, this factory, I've seen a lot of
factories in my day. You sure have. is
on a scale that I've never even
imagined.
[music] We're talking about more than a
thousand acres. The complex itself, I'm
looking at a long, low gray building
with a bunch of smoke stacks visible on
top. You can see at least a dozen
cranes. You can hear the roar of
something. There's black smoke now
coming out of the top of one of these
buildings. and beyond you can see these
cranes that are working and there are
construction cranes in every direction.
Now I lived in Shanghai, China in the
height of the construction boom there.
So I was in Dubai when Dubai was under
enormous construction and then to
[music] the west of there there's a ton
of cranes. Uh just counting real 1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 I mean I'm running out.
I' I've counted 15 of them. Uh, and
there's still more. And then there's
more visible like way beyond to the
west. That could be
>> these are the only places where I've
seen these numbers of cranes and numbers
of construction people [music] wandering
about. And that feeling of like you're
present there for a moment when things
are really changing in a [music] deep
way in that place.
>> Just beyond. I see heavy equipment on
the move. I see diggers that are [music]
moving soil around. There's a whole wall
of portaotties as you would expect at a
giant construction project. I mean this
is people say [music] the biggest
construction project in North America
and I I got to say it doesn't
disappoint.
>> And looking at this factory [music]
under construction evokes that sense as
well of scale. Not just scale but that
this is important beyond the thing
itself.
What does it represent? This gargantuan
cranefilled
factory bill. It represents a moment
when a consensus broke out in the
American political system, in the
business world, that globalization,
this system that we've been living under
for most of our adult lives, has been
very fruitful and beneficial in all
sorts of ways. But there are some things
where it matters where we make them. And
one of those things is computer chips.
We need to have our own stock of
computer chips. We need to make them at
home in the event of war or disaster.
And that's what they're making in these
factories that I saw. Computer chips are
the brains of just about everything. The
iPhone in your hand, the data centers
that are getting built all over the
place to make artificial intelligence
work. They're going into our cars.
They're going into our appliances. I
mean, it's pretty hard to think about
any manufactured product now that
doesn't have some kind of computer chip.
>> So, it would seem like a very, very big
and overdue thing to have such a factory
building those chips right here in
America.
>> It's a big deal. I mean, it is the most
palpable manifestation of this really, I
think you can say, national aspiration
to build things in America again. But
there are some complications.
[music]
This company that's building these
factories is not American. It's Taiwan
Semiconductor Manufacturing Corp. TSMC
as it's known. It is a Taiwanese
company. It is a very successful
Taiwanese company. But it's also been an
excruciating pain for TSMC [music] to
get this thing built with American
subsidies, with [music] a whole
political process designed to bring this
about. It's still been slow, expensive,
and difficult. [music] And so it really
raises the question, is this a triumph?
Is this the template for how we can do
this [music] going forward? Or is this
the cautionary tale?
So Peter, tell us the story of this
factory and all the ways in which it
suggests a potential future or perhaps
the impracticality of that future.
>> Look, you have to go back to the
pandemic, which was the great reveal
that it's not such a great idea to
concentrate nearly all of the production
of vital things in single countries. So,
you know, waking up and discovering that
you really can't make a ventilator in
the middle of a pandemic unless you
import stuff from China,
>> where the pandemic was at its worst,
>> where the pandemic began, a country that
not incidentally we decided to have a
trade war with, not a great way to
reliably get the stuff you need. And
computer chips, the most advanced ones,
are made overwhelmingly in Taiwan.
Taiwan is of course a self-governing
island that is claimed as part of
Chinese territory by the people's
republic of China and its government in
Beijing which means that you know there
is the not zero risk that on any given
day the Chinese military could show up
and take over and that could be an
enormous disruption to the computer
chip. And in a sense, the pandemic was a
potential theoretical foretaste of what
it would be like if all of a sudden
China were to invade Taiwan cuz it
showed us what it looks like when your
global supply chains get cut off.
Suddenly, we have to grapple with the
idea that maybe all those computer chips
can't ever get out of Taiwan.
>> And we have to think about resilience.
We need the the way to think of it is we
need some insurance. It's not that
globalization is bad. It's that
globalization without insurance against
the risks that are an inevitable part of
life. That's not so good.
>> And what does that insurance actually
look like?
>> It looks like the government saying
we're going to have to play a direct
role in making sure that certain things
are built in the United States and
that's going to require subsidies. So
along comes the Biden administration and
the Biden administration breaks from
generations of free trade dogma. This
idea that we just let the market sort
out what gets built and where. And they
say efficiency only takes us so far. The
government's going to have to play a
role in making sure that certain things
like computer chips are built in the
United States. And this becomes the
Chips and Science Act. this landmark
piece of legislation that's got tens of
billions of dollars in subsidies given
to companies that build computer chip
factories in the United States. One of
those companies, Taiwan Semiconductor,
actually participates in the writing of
this bill.
>> And that company, TSMC, ends up with a
$6 billion plus grant to then build this
complex of factories in Phoenix. At the
end of the day, when it's all built,
they'll be making roughly a third of all
the advanced ships they make worldwide
right there in Phoenix, Arizona.
>> That's a really, really big deal given
just how much of that work was
concentrated in Taiwan.
>> It's a very big deal. It's a very big
deal for TSMC. It's a very big deal for
the United States. And it's certainly a
very big deal for the local economy in
Phoenix, which is, you know,
traditionally been very tied to the boom
and bust cycle of real estate. And now
we're talking about thousands of jobs in
construction to build this, thousands
more to eventually make the chips
themselves. And then there's all sorts
of, you know, associated services,
lawyers, insurance companies, caterers,
truck drivers, warehouses,
>> right? A state would in theory kill for
this kind of economic activity.
>> Any state would kill for this kind of
economic activity. That's right.
So, on the day of the [music]
groundbreaking, this is December 2022,
you've got the Republican governor of
[music] the state of Arizona. You've got
members of the Senate. You have union
representatives, university [music]
presidents.
>> Well, I tell you what, you're starting
off in the right place. This is going to
be an incredible asset to the state of
Arizona. A special thanks to
>> And finally, Joe Biden, the Democratic
president, shows up leading the parade
in celebration of this enormous triumph
in economic development.
>> Your city and Gov, uh, you and I are
different sides, but we see and share
the same vision as Arizona is a hub,
literally a hub for tech for technical
change that's going to take place. And
that's well under
>> the president is associating his
administration with reclaiming the
future.
>> And I know our host won't mind my
pointing out that America invented the
chip.
>> He's delighted to be talking about what
a huge deal this is for the rejuvenation
of American manufacturing and in
something that's, you know,
forwardlooking. This is building an
American future in a technology that the
US actually pioneered.
>> And you're here because you're seeing
what we're all seeing. America
manufacturing is back, folks. American
manufacturing is back. [applause]
>> And I know because you said so at the
beginning of our conversation, Peter,
that this story is about to take a
complicated twist. But so far, it really
does feel worth saying that this is a
fable of what's possible in an American
system that's not known for getting big
domestic manufacturing projects of any
kind done.
>> Yeah. This is a real life manifestation
of what this enormous economy full of
talented skilled people
>> and political system
>> political system that doesn't always
help bring about the most fruitful
outcomes. But we got a lot of money. We
got a lot of knowhow. And if we can get
it all working right, this is what we
can produce.
>> [music]
>> And yet by the time I got out to Phoenix
about 3 years after the groundbreaking,
it was still a marker of incredible
triumph. But alongside the triumph was a
[music] sense that wow what a pain it's
been to get this constructed and that
the whole complex had become symbolic
not just of what we can achieve but also
the many ways in which American
governance can get in the way of our
visions.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
So, Peter, after all of this promise and
achievement in the story, what starts to
go wrong with the construction of this
set of factories after the
groundbreaking? Well, from the
beginning, it's clear that Taiwan
Semiconductor, this very successful
company that's managed to make and run
huge factories in Taiwan, is dealing
with a system that's very different than
the one that it's accustomed to. And you
know, at home in Taiwan, they're
building factories in these dedicated
science parks where there's one central
authority. There's one permit, one
inspection, and they're done.
>> How nice.
>> How nice. and they're separated from,
you know, homeowners who may have
different ideas about what they want to
see, what they want to live next to.
Well, in Phoenix, they're dealing with
the county. They're dealing with the
municipal government. There are state
and federal environmental regulations.
And so there are literally thousands of
permits that they have to get.
>> Thousands.
>> Thousands where it would have been one
in Taiwan. And this is all new to TSMC.
And even if an American company were
trying to do this, it would be new to
them because we, it turns out, don't
have regulations governing this
particular industry at the county in the
municipal level.
>> There's no code on page 25 of the local
zoning manual that says when building a
chip factory here in the desert, this is
the lighting system.
>> Correct. So TSMC actually has to write
18,000 rules.
>> Wow. that they then have to comply with
while they're trying to figure out like,
well, let's see. You've got this
federally administered clean air
program, but it's the county we actually
have to deal with to get the permit. And
they have to write the language. $18,000
rules cost them $35 million
>> just to write the rules. just to write
the rules, it turns out,
>> and just to be clear, when we say that
this company is writing
these rules,
they're helping write rules that will
then be drafted, adopted by local
government.
>> Correct. But this is like the frontier,
right? So, they actually have to get
down into the nitty-gritty of educating
the people who are supposed to be
regulating them on what it is that
they're doing and what could go wrong.
and how it needs to be done.
>> What's the most intriguing rule you came
across?
>> Huh? Well, at one point there was a
supplier company called Lindy that makes
air separation equipment. The the inside
of these computer chip factories has to
have really pure air. And so they pipe
in this clean air from a neighboring
plant and just to move a mound of dirt
and then leave part of the mound in
place required 15 different permits
[laughter]
and you know more than 15 different
inspections.
>> Okay, so that is the first of what I
imagine are many headaches,
>> right? Then they quickly figure out that
there aren't enough people with the
right sorts of skills to build one of
these plants. These plants have to be
built to extraordinary specificity. I
mean, it's, you know, it's kind of an
industrial magic trick to make a
computer chip. And it involves, you
know, beaming light onto tiny pieces of
silicon. It's sort of like a
photographic negative. We're talking
about fractions of a thousandth of a
percent of the width of a human hair.
Things have to be just so. And in
Taiwan, there are thousands of people
who've come through an apprentice
system, who've actually participated in
building fabs. The last time we
completed a large scale fab in the
computer chip industry in the United
States was 13 years ago.
>> So we just simply don't have the muscle
memory to build one of these plants. We
can't do this without relying on places
that have this expertise and those are
places in East Asia.
>> So how does the company deal with that?
They start bringing in specialized
workers from Taiwan, which immediately
causes, you know, major animosity with
local unions. And the local unions say,
"Well, hold on a second. If the federal
government's writing a check for six
plus billion dollar
>> should be American jobs.
>> We should be getting the job." And TSMC
says, "You will be getting thousands of
jobs, but to get this thing off and
running right now, we got to go find
some people who know how to install this
specialized, highly advanced equipment
that goes into these plants." So they
bring in people to do that.
>> So eventually the unions win some
promises that TSMC will hire a certain
number of workers and peace reigns with
the unions. But meanwhile, there's a
lawsuit filed by a bunch of American
workers who accuse TSMC of
discriminating against American workers,
treating them like they're lazy and
incompetent. They accuse the Taiwanese
managers of speaking in Chinese as a way
of excluding the American workers from
participating,
>> which is probably not quite the case.
They're probably speaking Chinese
because they speak Chinese.
>> I mean, they that's the language that
they could speak most efficiently. So, I
mean, this was certainly something that
I heard from Taiwanese Americans who are
living in Phoenix that, you know, it's
hardly an act of discrimination that,
you know, someone who's under the gun to
deliver on a complicated project that
costs billions of dollars, uh, with the
mothership breathing down their neck to
deliver, they're going to want to speak
to people in their native language. So
on top of all the tensions about rules,
there are these cultural tensions being
revealed between an international
company trying to do this hard thing and
a group of local American workers who
are chafing at all that represents. TSMC
is a highly successful company in its
own system, but now it's navigating a
different system and there's a different
set of expectations for workers. I mean,
in Taiwan, TSMC operates in a kind of
paternalistic fashion where we'll take
care of you. You'll be very well paid.
We'll get involved in your housing if
need be. But when we need you in the
middle of the night, when something goes
wrong at that factory, we really don't
care what you're up to. You got to be
over there pronto. And that's
understood. People work very long hours.
Construction crews work what we would
call overtime without logging as such.
the American worker is operating in a
system where uh we don't have the same
sort of faith in our employers. We don't
have the same sense of social
obligation. And so the American worker
comes at this from a much more
contractual, hey, you know, I'm supposed
to be off at 5 kind of standpoint and
you call me on the weekend, I'm home
with my kids, maybe I can't make it. And
so this creates all sorts of
misunderstandings,
bad feeling from the American
standpoint. They're dealing with this
doineering, you know, controloriented
company from the Taiwanese perspective.
They're dealing with workers who aren't
fully in it for the team and aren't
working as hard as the people they're
bringing in from Taiwan.
>> Mhm. And of course, we haven't even
gotten to the idea that there are
neighbors to this vast complex who no
doubt because this is the United States
have some questions and concerns.
>> Right? So, I spent time looking at uh a
plant that's being built by one of
TSMC's suppliers. It's a company called
Amcore. They do what's
>> an ancillary building nearby.
>> It's a so-called packaging plant. They
take the chips that are made and they
configure them to fit into your iPhone
or your car or whatever. Well, they end
up in this um right in the middle of a
planned mixeduse community that's
supposed to mean, you know, retail,
maybe some offices, walkable homes,
their golf courses around, and neighbors
learn that there's this factory planned.
Uh it's going to interfere with their
views, their peace and quiet. They're
worried about water. They're worried
about tractor trailers coming through
the area. and the local uh city, they
offer these asurances that the factory
is only going to be so high. It's not
going to be that big. And then
meanwhile, because of this stunning
demand for AI chips, suddenly it's going
to be twice as high. It's going to be
four times the footprint. And
eventually, these homeowners mass
together and they successfully kill this
plant or they at least they force Amcor
to go move to a different site. And I
think this is a moment worth unpacking
that on the one hand, if we're really
serious about having computer chips made
in the United States, we need a plant
like Amcors. On the other hand, these
homeowners didn't sign up for some sort
of national crusade in [laughter] to
advance American manufacturing. Most of
these people are retirees. They they
just want a peaceful place to live and
enjoy and watch the sunset and play
golf, right? So it's worth coming back
to this point that in Taiwan these two
groups would be separated by vast
distances. It's uniquely in the American
system and some people would call these
guys nimies. Others would say it's
absurd that government didn't plan this
better so that there is no collision of
interest. It's a bunch of retirees who
want to look at cactuses should be able
to do that at the same time that we're
figuring out where else in this giant
state of Arizona could there be a piece
of land big enough to have this factory.
In the course of reporting on all of
these disputes and tensions,
>> I'm curious where you found your
sympathies lying. Is it with a company
that says, "Look, we're just trying to
fulfill America's
pledge to have insurance against the
worst case scenarios. We're just trying
to build a factory in the US that makes
sure you have access to chips. We have
access to our clients." Did you find
yourself instead more drawn to these
American folks who said, "Wait a minute,
these should be American jobs, or we did
not sign up for this building in our
community." Well, I think part of the
complexity of this is that pretty much
everybody at the table has a reasonable
argument to make. We live in a
democracy. Uh people who buy homes in a
planned community expecting that maybe a
Starbucks will pop up um and not a
factory should have a say over what gets
built in their midst. And uh in a place
where uh it it's a desert. It's
literally a desert and you're worried
about shortages of water and there's
already great battles over who gets
access to the Colorado River and the
depletion of the watershed in areas.
There should be a process to figure out,
you know, what are the impacts and and a
lot of these permits are uh permits
under programs that represent triumphs
of American democracy. We have advanced
workplace safety. We have advanced
environmental protection. It's just that
this bureaucracy has now grown up around
some of these laws without us sorting
out these naughty land use questions.
And I think one can be sympathetic to
the argument that we have to think
seriously about our national security,
our industrial future, and that's going
to require a government role. But that's
got to be done in a thoughtful,
deliberative way, and we got a lot of
catchup to do in that area.
So I think Peter this brings us to the
most important and most existential
question of all to emerge from this
reporting you did which is did all of
the rigomeroll involved in getting this
project complete did it make this a
template for the reestablishment of
manufacturing in the United States at a
massive scale or does it loom as the
cautionary tale for why it's just too
hard to do this in the US that would
send similar companies and perhaps those
not getting a multi-billion dollar check
from the US government running in the
other direction.
>> Yeah, it's a great question. Um I would
say kids don't try this at home.
[laughter] Um I mean in like in all
seriousness we are tempted to look at
this and say of course at the beginning
it's going to be messy. It's going to be
tricky. We'll get better at this.
>> This is the messy beginning.
>> Yeah, it's the messy beginning. And
that, you know, we'll look back in 25
years and say, "Yeah, you know, that was
tough, but boy, we really got through
that. We really got something in this
template."
>> But, you know, let's remember Taiwan
Semiconductor is now promising to invest
$165
billion. There aren't a lot of companies
that can throw around that sort of
money. This is a highly successful
company. It is by any measure the global
industry leader. And they had a tough
time of it. uh they've said that they've
learned a lot and they're in a position
to go faster now and there's reason to
think that that's so but this is
certainly not something where just any
other company in any other place could
come along and summon out of nowhere
>> right and if it's this hard for the most
successful maker of computer chips in
the world
>> right
>> how hard will it be dot dot dot for
anybody else
>> correct and that message is out there
that the US is a tough place to do
business. It's a tough place to get
permits. It's a tough place to find
people you need to do the stuff that
needs to be done and you're going to
have to pay them a lot uh to do it. This
is not for the faint of heart. [music]
So, if we're trying to figure out
whether this project is going to send
the signal to investors and other
companies around the globe that, hey,
the US is open for business. Come build
a factory. it's gonna be awesome. This
is not that story. This is a story that
says it's possible. And if the
government writes you a check and gives
you concier service, which is what TSMC
has gotten, then maybe everything comes
together and makes it possible. But this
is not the thing that will convince
anyone that it's going to be really easy
to build a factory in the United States.
If you're in an industry where you're
not being forced essentially to build a
plant in the United States, there's a
good chance you'd look at this
experience and say, "Maybe we'll find
somewhere else to put our next factory."
[music]
>> Peter, [music]
thank you very much. We appreciate it.
>> Thank you, Michael.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Sunday, [music] the Trump
administration defended its decision to
remove more than a dozen photos related
to Jeffrey Epstein from a government
website just hours [music] after
thousands of files had been released to
the public on Friday evening.
The official, Deputy Attorney General
Todd Blanch, said that [music] the
photos, including one featuring
President Trump, had been removed to
address complaints from [music]
Epstein's victims, not to protect
President Trump.
>> We are not redacting information around
President Trump, around any other
individual involved with Mr. Epstein.
And and that narrative, which is not
based on fact at all, is completely
false. And over the weekend, [music] the
United States Coast Guard stopped and
boarded a tanker carrying [music]
Venezuelan oil, its second such
interception in the past month. The
Coast Guard is currently pursuing yet
another tanker linked to [music]
Venezuela, whose crew had refused to let
American guardsmen board [music] the
vessel. It's all part of a growing
pressure campaign against the Venezuelan
leader Nicholas Maduro [music]
that has increasingly been focused on
oil.
[music]
Today's episode was produced by [music]
Shannon Lynn and Mary Wilson with help
from AA Churby. [music] It was edited by
Mark George with help from Devon Taylor.
contains music [music] by Alyssa Moxley,
Alicia Baub, Pat McCusker, and Dan
Powell, and was engineered by Alyssa
[music] Moxley.
[music]
[music] That's it for the Daily. I'm
Michael Boro. See you tomorrow.